ABCDEFA rootkit is a program or a collection of malicious software tools that give a threat actor remote access to and control over a computer or other system. Although this type of software has some legitimate uses, such as providing remote end-user support, most rootkits open a backdoor on victims' systems to introduce malicious software -- including viruses, ransomware, keylogger programs or other types of malware -- or to use the system for further network security attacks. Rootkits often attempt to prevent detection of malicious software by deactivating endpoint antimalware and antivirus software.
Rootkits, which can be purchased on the dark web, can be installed during phishing attacks or employed as a social engineering tactic to trick users into giving the rootkits permission to be installed on their systems, often giving remote cybercriminals administrator access to the system. Once installed, a rootkit gives the remote actor access to and control over almost every aspect of the operating system (OS). Older antivirus programs often struggled to detect rootkits, but today, most antimalware programs can scan for and remove rootkits hiding within a system.
Since rootkits cannot spread by themselves, they depend on clandestine methods to infect computers. When unsuspecting users give rootkit installer programs permission to be installed on their systems, the rootkits install and conceal themselves until hackers activate them. Rootkits contain malicious tools, including banking credential stealers, password stealers, keyloggers, antivirus disablers and bots for distributed denial-of-service attacks.
Rootkits are installed through the same common vectors as any malicious software, including by email phishing campaigns, executable malicious files, crafted malicious PDF files or Microsoft Word documents, connecting to shared drives that have been compromised or downloading software infected with the rootkit from risky websites.
The following are some of the potential results of a rootkit attack:
Causes a malware infection. A rootkit can install malicious software on a computer, system or network that contains viruses, Trojans, worms, ransomware, spyware, adware and other deleterious software that compromise performance of the device or system or the privacy of its information.
Removes files. Rootkits install themselves through a backdoor into a system, network or device. This can happen during login or be the result of a vulnerability in security or OS software. Once in, the rootkit can automatically execute software that steals or deletes files.
Intercepts personal information. Rootkits known as payload rootkits often use keyloggers, which capture keystrokes without a user's consent. In other cases, these rootkits issue spam emails that install the rootkits when users open the emails. In both cases, the rootkit steals personal information, such as credit card numbers and online banking data, that is passed on to cybercriminals.
Steals sensitive data. By entering systems, networks and computers, rootkits can install malware that seeks sensitive and proprietary information, usually with the goal of monetizing that data or passing it to unauthorized sources. Keyloggers, screen scrapers, spyware, adware, backdoors and bots are all methods that rootkits use to steal sensitive data.
Changes system configurations. Once inside a system, network or computer, a rootkit can modify system configurations. It can establish a stealth mode that makes detection by standard security software difficult. Rootkits can also create a persistent state of presence that makes it difficult or impossible to shut them down, even with a system reboot. A rootkit can provide an attacker with ongoing access or change security authorization privileges to facilitate access.
Symptoms of rootkit infection
A primary goal of a rootkit is to avoid detection to remain installed and accessible on the victim's system. Although rootkit developers aim to keep their malware undetectable and there are not many easily identifiable symptoms that flag a rootkit infection, here are four indicators that a system has been compromised:
Antimalware stops running. An antimalware application that just stops running indicates an active rootkit infection.
Windows settings change by themselves. If Windows settings change without any apparent action by the user, the cause may be a rootkit infection. Other unusual behavior, such as background images changing or disappearing in the lock screen or pinned items changing on the taskbar, could also indicate a rootkit infection.
Performance issues. Unusually slow performance or high central processing unit usage and browser redirects may also point to the presence of a rootkit infection.
Computer lockups. These occur when users cannot access their computer or the computer fails to respond to input from a mouse or keyboard.
Types of rootkit
Rootkits are classified based on how they infect, operate or persist on the target system
Kernel mode rootkit. This type of rootkit is designed to change the functionality of an OS. The rootkit typically adds its own code -- and, sometimes, its own data structures -- to parts of the OS core, known as the kernel. Many kernel mode rootkits exploit the fact that OSes allow device drivers or loadable modules to execute with the same level of system privileges as the OS kernel, so the rootkits are packaged as device drivers or modules to avoid detection by antivirus software.
User mode rootkit. Also known as an application rootkit, a user mode rootkit executes in the same way as an ordinary user program. User mode rootkits may be initialized like other ordinary programs during system startup, or they may be injected into the system by a dropper. The method depends on the OS. For example, a Windows rootkit typically focuses on manipulating the basic functionality of Windows dynamic link library files, but in a Unix system, the rootkit may replace an entire application.
Bootkit or bootloader rootkit. This type of rootkit infects the Master Boot Record of a hard drive or other storage device connected to the target system. Bootkits can subvert the boot process and maintain control over the system after booting and, as a result, have been used successfully to attack systems that use full disk encryption.